Hash tables (#2)
Ada-Developers-Academy/core-interlude: hash-tables/problem-set-hash-tables.md

# Problem Set: Hash Table

## Directions

Complete all questions below. **Solve all questions using a hash table** (Python dictionary).

## Practice

<!-- Question 1 -->
<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
### !challenge
* type: code-snippet
* language: python3.6
* id: 9U2j0J
* title: Hash Tables
* points: 3
### !question

> Write a function `get_intersection` that takes two integer lists with unique values and returns their intersection in a new array.

Reviewer: Don't get me wrong, I really like the problem, but just note that Python does have built in set operations like intersection.

```python
def get_intersection(red, blue):
    red_set = set(red)
    blue_set = set(blue)
    return list(red_set.intersection(blue_set))
```

Reviewer 2: The following direction says not to use anything like this. Is the concern that students will anyway and that we'll need to remember to manually review the automated test results? Or is it more that we're possibly showing students a suboptimal approach?

If the former, we could at least make it harder to use set by replacing the set ctor to make it unusable (though I don't think we can easily prevent the use of {} literals). Something like

```python
import main as m

def set(*args):
    msg = "set class unavailable for these tests"
    raise NotImplementedError(msg)
m.set = set
```

This produces an error in the test as follows, which I think is very legible and description. 😁 
```
======================================================================
ERROR: test_get_intersection_many_matches (test_methods.TestChallenge)
----------------------------------------------------------------------
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "/usr/src/app/test_methods.py", line 31, in test_get_intersection_many_matches
    result = get_intersection(red, blue)
  File "/usr/src/app/main.py", line 2, in get_intersection
    red_set = set(red)
  File "/usr/src/app/test_methods.py", line 12, in set
    raise NotImplementedError(msg)
NotImplementedError: set class unavailable for these tests
```

If the latter, we could more explicitly acknowledge the existence of the set class as a better way of approaching this, but that we're explicitly practicing the use of dicts here.

Be sure to use a dictionary in your solution. Do not use any built-in intersection functions.

Here are the tests:

```python
def test_get_intersection_one_match():
    red = [2, 3, 4]
    blue = [4, 5, 6]
    assert get_intersection(red, blue) == [4]

def test_get_intersection_no_matches():
    red = [9, 30, 42]
    blue = [56, 34, 90, 32]
    assert get_intersection(red, blue) == []

def test_get_intersection_many_matches():
    red = [50, 43, 25, 72]
    blue = [25, 36, 43, 50, 80]
    result = get_intersection(red, blue)
    assert 25 in result
    assert 43 in result
    assert 50 in result
    assert len(result) == 3
```

### !end-question
### !tests
```python
import unittest

> from main import *

Reviewer 2: could import only get_intersection
```suggestion
from main import get_intersection
```

class TestChallenge(unittest.TestCase):
    # Note: Written with these asserts to mimic the pytest assertions we give students

    def test_get_intersection_one_match(self):
        red = [2, 3, 4]
        blue = [4, 5, 6]
        self.assertEqual(get_intersection(red, blue), [4])

    def test_get_intersection_no_matches(self):
        red = [9, 30, 42]
        blue = [56, 34, 90, 32]
        self.assertEqual(get_intersection(red, blue), [])

    def test_get_intersection_many_matches(self):
        red = [50, 43, 25, 72]
        blue = [25, 36, 43, 50, 80]
        result = get_intersection(red, blue)
        self.assertTrue(25 in result)
        self.assertTrue(43 in result)
        self.assertTrue(50 in result)
        self.assertEqual(len(result), 3)
```
### !end-tests
### !explanation

An example of a working implementation:

```python

> def get_intersection(red, blue):

Reviewer 2: I took a different approach where I calculated two separate dicts (caring only about the keys, the values were garbage), then iterated over the keys of one and checked whether the key existed in the other. I like this approach where the value has a meaning.

    frequency_hash = {}

    for list in [red, blue]:
        for item in list:

>             if frequency_hash.get(item):

Reviewer 2: for the puer boolean approach here, maybe show using `in` instead (setting the standard of depending on the `get` result without a discussion of values that could be misinterpreted as a missing key) makes me a little uncomfortable

```suggestion
            if item in frequency_hash:
```

But we could avoid the conditional completely by using the version of get that takes a default. If students haven't seen this version yet, they should feel comfortable looking it up
```python
            count = frequency_hash.get(item, 0)
            frequency_hash[item] = count + 1
```

    assert not is_permutation("pizza", "pasta")

def test_is_permutation_unmatching_lengths():
    assert not is_permutation("pizza", "piza")

def test_is_permutation_same_word():
    assert is_permutation("pizza", "pizza")

def test_is_permutation_empty_strings():
    assert is_permutation("", "")
```

### !end-question
### !tests
```python
import unittest
from main import *
class TestChallenge(unittest.TestCase):
    # Note: Written with these asserts to mimic the pytest assertions we give students

    def test_is_permutation(self):
        self.assertTrue(is_permutation("hello", "ehllo"))

    def test_is_permutation_false_different_qty_letters(self):
        self.assertTrue(not is_permutation("heelo", "ehllo"))

    def test_is_permutation_false_different_letters(self):
        self.assertTrue(not is_permutation("pizza", "pasta"))

    def test_is_permutation_unmatching_lengths(self):
        self.assertTrue(not is_permutation("pizza", "piza"))

    def test_is_permutation_same_word(self):
        self.assertTrue(is_permutation("pizza", "pizza"))

    def test_is_permutation_empty_strings(self):
        self.assertTrue(is_permutation("", ""))
```
### !end-tests

> ### !explanation

Reviewer 2: this relies on the insight that two permutations of the same letters have the same letter frequency. Can we provide a nudge in that direction? Maybe this is too explicit, but if the point of the exercise is to practice using dictionaries, I'd rather give them the push to see _how_ to use them for this problem, so that they can get the practice. I don't see this nudge as detracting from the learning.
```suggestion
### !hint
Many problems that use dictionaries to solve problems related to strings involve counting the available letters. What must be true about the counts of the letters in two different words in order for them to be permutations of one another?
### !end-hint

### !explanation
```

An example of a working implementation:

```python
def populate_frequency_map(text):
    frequency_hash = {}
    for char in text:

>         if frequency_hash.get(char):

Reviewer 2: similar minimal change here, but consider using `.get(char, 0)` as in comment above
```suggestion
        if char in frequency_hash:
```

def test_is_palindrome_permutation_unmatching_letters():
    assert not is_palindrome_permutation("hello")

def test_is_palindrome_permutation_empty_string():
    assert is_palindrome_permutation("")
```

### !end-question
### !tests
```python
import unittest
from main import *
class TestChallenge(unittest.TestCase):
    # Note: Written with these asserts to mimic the pytest assertions we give students

    def test_is_palindrome_permutation_simple(self):
        self.assertTrue(is_palindrome_permutation("lool"))

    def test_is_palindrome_permutation_palindrome(self):
        self.assertTrue(is_palindrome_permutation("racecar"))

    def test_is_palindrome_permutation_rearranged_palindrome(self):
        self.assertTrue(is_palindrome_permutation("carrace"))

    def test_is_palindrome_permutation_incomplete(self):
        self.assertTrue(not is_palindrome_permutation("raceca"))

    def test_is_palindrome_permutation_unmatching_letters(self):
        self.assertTrue(not is_palindrome_permutation("hello"))

    def test_is_palindrome_permutation_empty_string(self):
        self.assertTrue(is_palindrome_permutation(""))
```
### !end-tests

> ### !explanation

Reviewer 2: consider adding a hint as before to give the student some idea of _how_ to apply dictionaries to this problem.
```suggestion
### !hint
Many problems that use dictionaries to solve problems related to strings involve counting the available letters. What must be true about the counts of the letters in a string in order for it to be a palindrome? From the previous problem, can we say that the same must be true about a _permutation_ of a palindrome?
### !end-hint
### !explanation
```

An example of a working implementation:

```python
def is_palindrome_permutation(text):
    frequency_hash = {}
    for char in text:

>         if frequency_hash.get(char):

Reviewer 2: minimal suggestion, but consider switching to `.get(char, 0)` approach as in previous comments
```suggestion
        if char in frequency_hash:
```

            frequency_hash[char] += 1
        else:
            frequency_hash[char] = 1

>     num_of_single_matches_allowed = 1 if len(text) % 2 == 1 else 0

Reviewer 2: Is this calculation necessary? i.e. can we always just say that there is 1 odd match (btw, maybe this variable should be related to odd matches rather than single matches), then for an even length word, it's impossible to have only one single odd match (if only one, then every other letter was even, so by contradiction, the entire word must have actually been odd). There must be an even number of odd matches, so allowing up to a single odd match will work even for even length words.

>     for char, frequency in frequency_hash.items():

Reviewer 2: char isn't used, could use values() instead of items()
```suggestion
    for frequency in frequency_hash.values():
```

>     num_of_single_matches_allowed = 1 if len(text) % 2 == 1 else 0
> 
>     for char, frequency in frequency_hash.items():
>         if frequency % 2 != 0 and num_of_single_matches_allowed:
>             num_of_single_matches_allowed -= 1
>         elif frequency % 2 != 0:
>             return False
> 
>     return True

Reviewer 2: Alternatively, I like a slightly different approach that counts the number of odd matches, and compares them to the number of allowed odd matches (1). No compound conditional or elif required.
```suggestion
    odd_matches = 0
    for frequency in frequency_hash.values():
        if frequency % 2:
            odd_matches += 1
            
    return odd_matches <= 1
```
